<!-- image -->

## ENGAGING MEN IN GENDERTRANSFORMATIVE APPROACHES TO END VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

A  Guidance  Note  to  Inform  the  Development  of  National  Policies  and Programmes  Based  on  Results  from  the  International  Men  and  Gender Equality Survey (IMAGES) - Middle East and North Africa.

<!-- image -->

## ENGAGING MEN IN GENDERTRANSFORMATIVE APPROACHES TO END VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN

<!-- image -->

A Guidance Note to Inform the Development of National Policies and Programmes Based on Results from the International Men and Gender Equality Survey (IMAGES) - Middle East and North Africa

## ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank Lena Karlsson, Lemonia Fokaidou, Zineb Chebihi, Hadeel Abdo, Maria Ghazzaoui, Rasha Abou Elazm, Jumanah Zabaneh, Heba Katoon, Manal Benkirane, Yoko Maruta and Maryse Guimond at UN Women for their support and thoughtful review of this document. Thanks are also due to Gary Barker, Shereen El Feki and Kristina Vlahovicova for their inputs and strategic direction and to Bel é n Bonilla and Nina Ford of Promundo-US for their editorial support. Abby Fried, Alexa Hassink, Brian Heilman and Annaick Miller of Promundo-US are the authors of this guidance.

## © UN Women

## The International Men and Gender Equality Survey (IMAGES MENA)

The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of UN Women, the United Nations or any of its affiliated organizations. For a list of any errors or omissions found subsequent to printing please visit our website.

Designer: UN Women/Mohamed Gaber

Cover photo: UN Women/Emad Karim

## TABLE OF CONTENTS

| THE STATE OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN IN                                                                                                                          |     |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----|
| THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA                                                                                                                                | 6   |
| AND RESPONDING TO VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN HOW CAN WE PROMOTE PROGRAMMES TO ENGAGE MEN IN PREVENTING AND RESPONDING TO VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN IN THE MENA REGION? | 8 9 |
| ADVOCACY FOR ACTION: CREATING AN ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR PREVENTING VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN                                                                     | 12  |
| Leveraging international standards:The Sustainable Development Goals                                                                                            |     |
| Possible entry points and targets for advocacy at                                                                                                               | 12  |
| the national level                                                                                                                                              | 13  |
| RECOMMENDATIONS FOR GENDER-TRANSFOR- MATIVE POLICY CHANGE                                                                                                       | 14  |
| CONCLUSION                                                                                                                                                      | 16  |
| END NOTES                                                                                                                                                       | 17  |

The  Middle  East  and  North  Africa  (MENA)  region continues  to  witness  progress  -  driven  by  new Government  policies  and  civil  society  initiatives -  in  health  and  education  indicators,  and  toward greater gender equality, including the advancement of women's rights. However, as in all regions of the world, there is a long road ahead before women attain true equality with men.

This guidance note draws data and recommendations  from Understanding  Masculinities:  Results from  the  International  Men  and  Gender  Equality Survey (IMAGES) - Middle East and North Africa 1  on the topic of ending violence against women 2  for the well-being of women, men, children and societies. It provides broad guidance on how civil society partners and United Nations key players in the region can design and adapt programming and influence a  policy  environment  that  promotes  non-violence at  home, at work and in public spaces, all with a view to achieving the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030.

The  recommendations  put  forward  in  this  note  are intended  to  serve  as  top-level,  regional  guidance, and  should  be  further  contextualized  and  adapted for use at the national level. This guidance note was produced in combination with three other guidance notes  on  the  topics  of  gender  socialization,  young men and fatherhood and caregiving. When adapting the  content  and  recommendations of this guidance note, both women and girls and men and boys should be understood as a diverse group of individuals with different  experiences  and  varying  needs,  based  on their gender identity, sexual orientation, religious affiliation and ability.

The International Men and Gender Equality Survey - Middle East and North Africa (IMAGES MENA) is designed to take a holistic look at the lives of men and women in the region. The nearly 10,000-person (men and women) study undertaken by UN Women,

Promundo  and  local  research  partners  in  Egypt, Lebanon (including Syrian refugees), Morocco and Palestine investigates many of the stereotypes commonly associated  with  men  and  women  in  these countries, and highlights pathways to equality.

## THE STATE OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA 3

Men's use of violence against women is widespread in the region, both at home and in public spaces, and it takes all forms: physical, sexual, emotional and economic. While many men describe spousal violence as a past phenomenon, pointing to women's improved status as proof that violence being common and less acceptable, the data show otherwise. Research by the World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  has  uncovered  a global lifetime prevalence of intimate partner violence at 30 per cent. IMAGES MENA data finds that in Egypt, Lebanon,  Morocco  and  Palestine, 4 approximately  10 per cent to 45 per cent of ever married men reported having used physical violence against a female partner,  with  approximately  equal  numbers  of  women affirming  they  had  experienced  such  violence.  The high rates of emotional violence (for example, insults, humiliation, intimidation, threats) also adversely impact women's lives. Between 20 per cent and 80 per cent of men reported having perpetrated some form of emotional violence against their wives. Tolerance of men's use of intimate partner violence is widespread: for example, in Egypt, 90 per cent of men and 70 per cent  of  women said  they  believe  that  wives  should tolerate violence to keep the family together. Across research regions, the reported rates of perpetration of intimate partner violence among ever married men age 18-59 and the number of ever married women in the age group 18-59, who report experiencing intimate partner violence, are significant, a situation reflected in Figure 1. 5

## FIGURE 1: WOMEN'S EXPERIENCES AND MEN'S PERPETRATION OF EMOTIONAL IPV AND PHYSICAL IPV

Percentage of ever married men reporting ever perpetrating IPV and ever married women reporting ever experiencing intimate partner violence, IMAGES MENA 2016

<!-- image -->

While the vast majority of violence against women in the region and worldwide is committed by male intimate partners, non-partner physical and sexual violence is also a problem. Commonly reported perpetrators of non-partner physical violence include fathers, other family members (male and female), teachers,  co-workers  and  strangers.  A  majority  of men  and  women  in  many  countries  believe  that if  a  woman is raped, she should marry her rapist, although activists in many countries are challenging  this  belief  with  public  awareness  campaigns and legal reforms, such as the recent repeal of such laws  in  Jordan,  Lebanon  and  Morocco,  laws  that allowed rapists to evade punishment by marrying their accusers. One of the most significant recent reforms in the region occurred in Tunisia, where the Parliament  passed  a  legislative  package    on    violence prevention against women in 2017. 6

Violence  against  women  takes  different  forms throughout the region, including in areas involved in IMAGES MENA research. Egypt, for example, has high  rates  of  female  genital  mutilation/cutting

(FGM/C), with 92 per cent of ever-married women reporting  having  been  circumcised,  according  to IMAGES MENA, and 70 per cent of men and 56 per cent of women approving of the practice (even as the most recent Demographic and Health Survey in Egypt suggests that the practice has decreased in recent years). 7

Another notable form of violence against women in  the  region  is  street-based  sexual  harassment, including sexual comments, stalking/following, or staring/ogling. Between 31 per cent and 65 per cent of men in the region report that they have ever carried out such acts, while 40 per cent to 63 per cent of women report they have ever experienced such types of harassment. 8  When asked why they engage in such practices, the vast majority of men - up to 90 per cent in some countries - said they did it for fun, with two thirds to three quarters blaming women for  dressing  'provocatively.'  Interestingly, similar percentages of women in several countries surveyed also share this view.

## FIGURE 2: WOMEN'S EXPERIENCES AND MEN'S PERPETRATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT AND ASSAULT

Percentage of men who have committed selected acts of sexual harassment/assault against women, and women who have experienced such acts in public spaces, lifetime rates, IMAGES MENA 2016 9

Sexual/Street Harrassment

<!-- image -->

Violence by men against women tends to increase in  times  of  humanitarian crises, including in conflict and war. 10 As noted in the Beijing Platform for Action, 'While entire communities suffer the consequences of armed conflict and terrorism, women and girls are particularly affected because of their status in society and their sex.' 11   As such, programmers and donors must account for the impacts of active  conflicts  in  the  region  on  women's  risk  of exposure to multiple forms of violence.

## PROGRAMMATIC GUIDANCE: PREVENTING AND RESPONDING TO VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN

The roots of violence against women in the MENA region, as in other parts of the world, are complex. Notable  root  causes  of  violence  include  women's limited power and mobility, widely held attitudes that  justify  violence  and  exposure  to  violence  in childhood. In all four countries surveyed in IMAGES MENA, half to three quarters of the men reported having experienced physical violence in their homes growing up, and two thirds or more reported having  experienced  physical  violence  by  teachers  or peers in school. In 2015, researchers found that 80 per cent of children in select MENA sites were subject to corporal punishment at home. 1213 In all four IMAGES MENA countries, as seen in other regions of  the  world, 14 men  who  witnessed  their  fathers using  violence  against  their  mothers,  and  men who experienced some form of violence at home as children, were significantly more likely to report perpetrating  intimate  partner  violence  in  their adult relationships.

Realizing a meaningful reduction in the prevalence and  harmful  effects  of  violence  against  women is  an  urgent  global  and  regional  priority  that  can only be addressed using a broad, multilevel framework 15   for  understanding violence against women. Programming must consider factors that contribute to violence against women at the individual, relationship,  community  and  societal  levels,  and  the interrelationships  among  these  levels. 16 Violence against  women  in  the  MENA  region  and  around the world can only be reduced with comprehensive and multilevel efforts in many sectors. This includes legal  advocacy  both  to  advance  comprehensive legislation criminalizing all forms of violence and to assist survivors of violence in seeking some amount of justice if they choose; health and social support services to assist survivors of violence in healing after  their  traumatic  experiences;  community-based conversations  and  campaigns  to  shift  attitudes that  accept  this  violence  as  natural  or  normal; among  many  others.  IMAGES  MENA  data  give  us new insights into women's experiences of partner and non-partner violence in the MENA region and underscore  the  need  for  increased  investment  in programming across all the aforementioned levels.

## HOW CAN WE PROMOTE PROGRAMMES TO ENGAGE MEN IN PREVENTING AND RESPONDING TO VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN IN THE MENA REGION?

In recent decades, there has been undeniable progress in advancing women's political, social and economic rights in  the  MENA  region,  including  with  new  legislation criminalizing various forms of violence against women. By and large, constitutions and legislative frameworks across the region call for equality between women and men and aim to protect women's rights so that they can live a life free of violence. Such legislative protections are a necessary but insufficient step to eliminating violence against women in the region, and significant other gaps remain.  Even  in  the  current  legal  context,  restrictions remain,  as  reflected  in  certain  countries'  reservations to  CEDAW  based  on  conservative  interpretations  of shari'a. 17 In  addition  to  improved  implementation  of laws  that  guarantee  women's  right  to  live  free  from violence, the best programmes to prevent and respond to violence against women in the MENA region should consider the following guidelines:

-  One-off campaign, short-term initiatives and limited  reach  programmes  are  likely  not  enough  to fundamentally address such a pervasive problem; instead, develop mutually reinforcing programme components  at  the  individual,  institutional  and community  levels. The  roots  of  violence  against women are as complex as its harmful effects. This is not a problem that can be addressed by simple solutions, yet many programmes globally are designed and implemented as if this were the case. International evidence shows that a simple one-off community campaign or other short-term, isolated programme approach to address the issue of violence against women is insufficient. 18  Programmes should employ multiple methods, work with multiple  stakeholder  groups,  address  as  many of the underlying risk factors for violence as possible and do so across localities. A group education programme,  for  instance,  should  provide  referral services  to  counselling  and  psychosocial  support services, and if possibly create or collaborate with public campaigns against violence. This kind of approach addresses the individual, relationship and social levels simultaneously. The costs of such an approach are significant, urging programmers and

donors alike to work in coordinated ways, seeing their individual organization's work as part of a larger, aligned movement to address violence. When it is impossible to lead multiple programme components as one single organization, it is important to assess and understand which contributions to the field are most needed in a given location. For example, the United Nations Joint Global Programme on Essential Services for Women and Girls Subject to Violence -- a partnership with UN Women, the United Nations Population Fund, WHO, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime -- identifies the essential services to be provided by the health,  social  services,  police  and  justice  sectors, and the guidelines for the coordination of essential services and the governance of coordination processes and mechanisms. Service delivery guidelines for the core elements of each essential service are identified to ensure the execution of high-quality services and the effectiveness of a comprehensive and multisectoral approach.

## A 'SELF-ASSESSMENT' TOOL FOR PROGRAMMES ADDRESSING VIOLENCE

## BOX 1 AGAINST WOMEN

Often, practitioners are caught up in the urgency of  action  to  address  violence  against  women. Opportunities  to  reflect  on  the  design  of  their projects, to learn from the experiences of other innovators, or to set goals for growth and evolution are rare. At times, even the best intentioned efforts, when undertaken with this urgency and little reflection, can end up being ineffective or, worse,  causing  harm  to  the  very  women  who are most in need of support. To meet this challenge, the International Centre for Research on Women released a web-based self-assessment tool  for  organizations  working  to  address  violence against women. The tool aims to facilitate reflection within grassroots violence-prevention organizations, helping them identify programme strengths,  opportunities  for  improvement  and priorities  for  capacity-building.  The  tool  provides  a  simple  four-point  scale  rating  process, using several dozen indicators drawn  from

international literature on the most ethical, effective  practices  in  addressing  violence  against women, with questions tailored to community mobilization, health and social support services, legal aid, advocacy, media and communications, capacity-building  and  partnerships.  Begin  your organization's  self-assessment  process  now  by visiting: http:/ /vaw.icrw.org

The self-assessment tool is not yet available in Arabic.

-  Go beyond simply recognizing inequalities. Instead, work to directly challenge and change the  harmful  norms  that  perpetuate  inequality and justify men's use of violence in the first place. Transforming gender norms in this way can help avoid  negative  unintended  consequences.  For example, women who gain economic status may be at greater risk of intimate partner violence if underlying ideas about masculinity and income earning are not addressed with their male partners. One such gender-transformative approach, the Gender  Equity  Model  Project  in Egypt, brings  together  the  Government,  NGOs  and private firms in an innovative intervention that seeks  to  prevent  and  reduce  violence  against women in combination with women's economic empowerment initiatives. The Project does this by understanding how men and women in the targeted  communities  construct  gender  roles and relationships, with a focus on religious and social misconceptions that promote the justification of inter-spousal violence. 19
-  Programmes  must  keep  women's  rights  and women's safety at the centre of their work and maintain movement solidarity and accountability when engaging men. Activists, practitioners and  policymakers  around  the  world  recognize the  importance  of  engaging  men  and  boys  in efforts to prevent violence against women, and to  promote  broader  gender  equality.  To  leave men  out  of  this  equation  can  be  tantamount to burdening women and girls with the task of ending  global  epidemics  that  occur  on  a  wide scale in the form of men's actions. Leaving men out of the violence prevention movement also underutilizes the positive potential influence of the many men - the majority, in most cases who  reject  violence  against  women.  However,

'engaging  men  and  boys'  must  never  be  an end unto itself. Any thoughtful approaches for bringing more men and boys into gender equality  work  are  nullified  when  such  programmes begin to replicate the very gender injustices they need to be reversing, for instance, giving disproportionate space to men's voices, opinions and leadership while side-lining women's. This is still too  often  the  case.  A  recent  literature  review reported that two thirds of global programmes working with men and boys on gender-related objectives made no outreach or effort to prioritize their activities based on needs expressed by women or girls. 20   Programmes  that  work  with men and boys to prevent and address violence against  women  must  align  themselves  with women's  priorities  and  leadership,  and  never falter  in  their  accountability  to  the  women's movement.

## BOX 2 THE MENENGAGE ACCOUNTABILITY TOOLKIT

The MenEngage Alliance, a global network of 700  civil  society  organizations  working  with men  and  boys  to  advance  gender  justice, has  released  a  toolkit  to  support  member organizations in ensuring that at every stage, every component of their work is aligned with principles of solidarity with and accountability to women's rights organizations and movements in their localities. The MenEngage Accountability guidelines and toolkit can help  any  programme  with  men  and  boys in  the  MENA  region  to  ensure  that  their work supports local women-led efforts.

## Accountability Standards and Guidelines:

http:/ /menengage.org/wp-content/ uploads/2015/11/MenEngage\_Accountability-Standards-and-Guidelines.pdf

## Accountability Training Toolkit:

http:/ /menengage.org/wp-content/ uploads/2015/11/MenEngage-AccountabilityToolkit.pdf

The accountability guidelines and toolkits are not yet available in Arabic.

-  Focus on the community to help avoid counterproductive notions of men versus women. Even in highly restrictive and patriarchal settings, men  and  women  do  not  live  in  isolation  from one  another,  although  programme  and  policy documents can sometimes imply as much. Rather,  men and women live in community with one  another,  with  their  roles  and  responsibilities defined in relation to one another, not in isolation. As  such,  some  violence  prevention  programme models  have  found  effectiveness  by  engaging whole  communities  and  using  messages  about community  well-being  as  opposed  to  genderspecific target groups and messages.
-  Take an empowering, aspirational approach. Men's violence  against  women  is  a  violation  of  human rights, and it is  tempting - and sometimes necessary - to take a programme approach that emphasizes the  harms  of  this  violence,  or  that  'names  and shames' high-profile perpetrators. But lessons from community  work  to  address  violence  show  that programme participants have a limited interest in engaging in programmes that take only a negative tone in their overall framing and messaging. The most  effective  programmes  are  ones  in  which participants  are  not  seen  as  'beneficiaries,'  but rather as fully empowered agents of their lives and futures.  Posters,  images  and  messages  showing a thriving family free of violence, or a vibrant city street free from sexual harassment, are likely to be more  effective,  empowering  and  engaging  than images of violence, injury and abuse intended to provoke the audience.  These images can feature the voices of the many men in the MENA region who  proudly  shape  their  identity  based  on  a rejection of all forms of violence against women.

## BOX 3

The Cairo Safe City Programme  is  part of UN Women's Safe Cities Global Initiative, covering more than 20 cities. The Cairo Safe City  Programme  aims  to  prevent  and reduce  sexual  harassment  and  other  forms of sexual violence in public spaces, and has a component of male engagement.

Mohamed Nimr, a tuk-tuk driver who participated  in  the  Safe  City  programme,  lives in his family home with his four sisters and his mother. 'At first,  I  treated  my  mother  violently in an agitated and cruel manner. However, after joining  the  project,  I  learned  how  to  deal  with women,  especially  my  sisters  and  my  mother. I  am  a  tuk-tuk  driver  and,  on  the  road,  I  now respect women who ride with me. Before, I used the  street  as  if  it  belonged  only  to  me  while women did not have the right to even walk along the street. Even at home, I used to hit my younger sister and shout at her. I used to insist that my demands  are  met  straight  away,  and  if  not,  I shouted and quarrelled which created problems. Since  I  joined  the  'Safe  Cities'  programme,  I realized  that  I  was  the  cause  of  the  problem. I  was  the  one  who  didn't  know  how  to  treat others,  so  I  mended  my  relations  with  them.' The Programme (2011-2018) was launched with the support of the  USAID,  the  European  Union  and Spanish Agency for International  Development Cooperation,  in  a  strong  partnership  with  the Government of Egypt, grassroots women, NGOs, UN Women, the United Nations Human Settlement  Programme,  other  United  Nations agencies, the private sector and other partners.

## BOX 4 EMPOWERING CAMPAIGN IMAGES

In  line  with  the  ABAAD  -  Resource  Centre for  Gender  Equality's  strategy  of  engaging men and boys - along with women and girls -  in  combatting  violence  against  women, on  12  November  2017,  ABAAD  organized  a march of 350 activists in Beirut to call on the authorities to increase the sentence for rape within  the  family.  Participants  wore  signs reading '#WithTheIncrease,' referring to the five-year  jail  sentence  faced  by  perpetrators of  rape  against  members  of  their  family,  as per  article  506  of  the  Lebanese  Penal  Code. In  addition,  another  group  of  men  were dressed in jail uniforms with their hands tied with a chain, symbolizing the need to expose the  crime  of  rape  against  members  of  the family and  to buttress the existing sentence.

- Use the evidence base. With leadership by international21  and  regional  institutions  alike,  including the Centre of Arab Women for Training and Research (CAWTAR), ABAAD, IMAGES research partners and others,  there  is  a  better  understanding  of  which programme  approaches  and  methodologies  for addressing  violence  against  women  have  proven most effective. Resources available on the website 'What Works' (http:/ /www.whatworks.co.za/) are particularly valuable in this regard.

## BOX 5

Leveraging media channels to address gender inequality

Palestine: UN  Women  Palestine  partnered with  the  NISAA  Network  for  Media Training and Coaching to produce and broadcast seven radio drama series addressing the issue of  violence  against  women,  and  how  men and  boys  can  step  up  to  prevent  violence and  change  social norms.  Specific topics of  broadcasts  on  NISAA  FM  radio  included early  marriage,  sexual  harassment,  societal violence, economic challenges and masculinity. Local university students wrote the scripts with the support of UN Women and recorded the radio drama with supervision from NISAA.  NISAA  broadcast  the  series  twice  on their  radio  channels.  This  type  of  approach was novel in Palestine, and may be the first experience  where  radio  drama  series  were used to address men's use of violence against women,  involving  the  voices  of  local  youth in  the  script  development  and  recording.

## ADVOCACY FOR ACTION: CREATING AN ENABLING ENVIRONMENT FOR PREVENTING VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN

Supportive laws, policies and practices within schools,  the  health  sector  and  the  justice  system are an essential component of preventing violence against  women, for holding perpetrators accountable and obtaining justice and support for victims of  violence.  National  policies  in  place  on  these topics throughout the region should be considered when adapting the recommendations of this guidance note at the national level.

Countries across the region can rightly celebrate the triumphs of local women's movements in obtaining ratification  of  domestic  violence  legislation  in  recent years. Global demographic and health surveys data show that women who live in countries with domestic violence legislation are seven per cent less likely to experience violence compared with women in countries without such laws. Furthermore, each additional  year  that  a  country  has  had  domestic violence  legislation  in  place  is  associated  with  a reduced  prevalence  of  violence  of  about  two  per cent. 22 These  reductions  are  meaningful  and  inspiring, but certainly do not represent a complete solution to the issue of violence against women in the  MENA region and around the world. Regional activists must continue the effort to stop violence all the more intensely with laws on the books.

Civil  society  and  United  Nations  key  players  can -  and  have  -  played  a  role  in  influencing  policymakers,  key  stakeholders  and  relevant  audiences to  advocate  for  policy  change. 23 Advocacy  can  be conducted  in  many  ways:  through  written  statements,  meetings,  or  briefings  with  policy-makers and decision-making bodies; by building and taking collective action with partnerships, coalitions, and alliances;  or  by  leading  targeted  communications campaigns or media engagement efforts. National strategies  or  'plans  of  action'  can  sometimes  be useful  mechanisms  for  engendering  cooperation among civil society and Government actors, and for allowing both groups to hold the other(s) accountable.  As  a  recent  CAWTAR-co-authored  literature review  imparts,  however,  'few  countries  [in  the MENA  region]  have  developed  national  policies, strategies,  or  plans  explicitly  focused  on  genderbased violence in all its forms, and even fewer have invested efforts to translate existing strategies into improved  legislation  or  better  programmes  and services  on  the  ground.' 24   Some  notable  exceptions  cited  in  the  same  review  include  new  laws to address FGM/C and sexual harassment in public spaces (Egypt); policies establishing centres for protection of survivors (in Palestinian Territories); and new policies in Egypt, Jordan and Morocco addressing sexual harassment in the workplace.

It is important to advocate for gender-transformative policies . These policies are ones which explicitly identify and address the unequal power dynamics and root causes of violence against women, actively seeking to challenge and transform existing, harmful gendered dynamics and power imbalances (see examples in the table below).

## LEVERAGING INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS: THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS

There  are  many  international  mechanisms  (goals, resolutions,  platforms  for  action,  among  others) designed  to  hold  National  Governments  accountable for advancing gender equality and preventing violence against Women globally. 25  Notably, all Arab countries, except Somalia and Sudan, have ratified CEDAW,  adopted  in  1979  by  the  United  Nations General Assembly. Although the majority initially  expressed  reservations  to  some  of  its  main provisions, upon ratification, some countries, such as  Morocco,  withdrew  their  reservations  in  recent years, which is an encouraging sign of progress. 26,27

The  SDGs 28 of  the  2030  Agenda  for  Sustainable Development 29   provide  the  opportunity  for  global attention to the issue of violence against women. SDG  Goal  5  in  particular  aims  to  achieve  gender equality by 2030. It also includes a specific target to 'eliminate all forms of violence against all women and girls in the public and private spheres, including trafficking, sexual, and other types of exploitation.'

Civil society and United Nations partners can support Governments 30  in reaching this goal in many ways, including by undertaking the following actions:

-  Building  their  capacity  to  understand  how  gendered power inequalities of men and women lead to violence against women;
- Providing  evidence-based  best  practices  in  programmatic approaches and policies to promote non-violent, healthy relationships, to hold perpetrators accountable and to provide justice for survivors;
- Collecting  disaggregated  data  on  both  male  and female  attitudes  and  behaviours  in  relation  to violence; and
- Building  civil  society  partnerships  to  effectively implement policies, protocols and programmes to advance the Sustainable Development Goals.

## POSSIBLE ENTRY POINTS AND TARGETS FOR ADVOCACY AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL

Many  examples  of  national  policies  (listed  in  the table  below)  can  be  advocated  for,  implemented and enforced to prevent violence against women. At the same time, efforts can be made to hold perpetrators accountable and provide justice and support systems  for  victims  of  violence.  These  examples should be adjusted thoughtfully for each particular country context.

## Areas for advocacy in the MENA region to prevent and address violence against women

| Policy                        | Status                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Recommendation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|-------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Domestic Violence Legislation | As of 2016, legislation on domestic violence is less prevalent in the Middle East and North Africa than in other regions around the world: only 4 out of 19 economies covered have enacted such laws. 31 In economies which have not enacted legislation (and have not increased penalties for intra-family violence), domestic violence can still be prosecuted under gen- eral criminal laws, such as assault. However, specific domestic violence legislation addresses the unique elements of intra-family violence and incorporates mechanisms to protect and support women seeking assistance. 32 | Domestic violence legislation should include significant training for law enforce- ment personnel, contain well-enforced measures such as orders for protection, and specialized courts with the sensitivity and training to handle domestic violence cases. 33 |

| Sexual Harassment                                                                                      | In the region, few countries have laws on sexual ha- rassment in the workplace, and even fewer on sexual harassment in schools. In the Middle East and North Africa, 21 per cent of the economies 34 in the region have a law on sexual harassment in employment, 11 per cent on sexual harassment in education and 21 per cent on sexual harassment in public spaces. 35 MENA is one of the top regions to have laws prevent- ing sexual harassment in public spaces, even though, according to one report, only 1 in 5 MENA countries have such laws. 36 Egypt, among other countries, has recently adopted a law that criminalizes sexual harass- ment in employment, education and public spaces, tors of in the public norms of private Men held                                                                                                                            | In the region, few countries have laws on sexual ha- rassment in the workplace, and even fewer on sexual harassment in schools. In the Middle East and North Africa, 21 per cent of the economies 34 in the region have a law on sexual harassment in employment, 11 per cent on sexual harassment in education and 21 per cent on sexual harassment in public spaces. 35 MENA is one of the top regions to have laws prevent- ing sexual harassment in public spaces, even though, according to one report, only 1 in 5 MENA countries have such laws. 36 Egypt, among other countries, has recently adopted a law that criminalizes sexual harass- ment in employment, education and public spaces, tors of in the public norms of private Men held                                                                                                                            | Legislation should exist to hold perpetra- sexual harassment accountable workplace, in schools and in spaces, and should be implemented alongside efforts to eradicate the societal and messages that make this kind behaviour seem 'normal' in public and life. hold many influential roles in the implementation of these laws and must be accountable for their effectiveness.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Rape                                                                                                   | Although rape is a crime punished by law in the region (with the exception of marital rape, which is only explicitly criminalized in one of the MENA economies - Malta - in the Women, Business and the Law data set), 38 there are many laws in the region that exoner- ate the rapist if the perpetrator is willing to marry the victim, even if the survivor is a minor. In Lebanon, advocacy recently led to the repeal of Article 522 of the Penal Code, which had allowed rapists to avoid prison by marrying their victims. In Egypt and Morocco, marital rape is not specifically criminalized, although IMAGES data show support from both women and men for doing so. (Women are more likely to support such a law, although the majority of men support such a law, but numerically fewer than women.)                                                                | Although rape is a crime punished by law in the region (with the exception of marital rape, which is only explicitly criminalized in one of the MENA economies - Malta - in the Women, Business and the Law data set), 38 there are many laws in the region that exoner- ate the rapist if the perpetrator is willing to marry the victim, even if the survivor is a minor. In Lebanon, advocacy recently led to the repeal of Article 522 of the Penal Code, which had allowed rapists to avoid prison by marrying their victims. In Egypt and Morocco, marital rape is not specifically criminalized, although IMAGES data show support from both women and men for doing so. (Women are more likely to support such a law, although the majority of men support such a law, but numerically fewer than women.)                                                                | Legislation should criminalize rape, includ- ing the act of marital rape, by providing that rape or sexual assault provisions apply 'irrespective of the nature of the relationship' between the perpetrator and complainant, or by stating that 'no mar- riage or other relationship shall constitute a defence to a charge of rape.' 39 This should be accompanied by awareness-raising campaigns and policies that provide services and protections for survivors of sexual violence.                                                                                                                            |
| Female genital mutilation/ cutting (FGM/C),                                                            | In a 2013 report by UNICEF, 8 per cent of women ages 15-49 in Iraq, 23 per cent in Yemen and 91 per cent in Egypt had undergone FGM/C. 40 Results from IMAGES in Egypt found that men were significantly more sup- portive of FGM/C than women were. Around 70 per cent of men approved of the practice, as opposed to 56 per cent of women, and men were more supportive than women of continuing the practice because of tradition, due to of its status as a perceived religious obligation. 41 Egypt criminalized FGM/C in 2008 and re- vised the law in 2016, raising it from a misdemeanour with a maximum sentence of three years in prison to a felony with a penalty of 5 to 15 years in prison. Judges, doctors and officials are receiving training on how to identify, investigate and report the crime, although implementation remains difficult and inconsistent. | In a 2013 report by UNICEF, 8 per cent of women ages 15-49 in Iraq, 23 per cent in Yemen and 91 per cent in Egypt had undergone FGM/C. 40 Results from IMAGES in Egypt found that men were significantly more sup- portive of FGM/C than women were. Around 70 per cent of men approved of the practice, as opposed to 56 per cent of women, and men were more supportive than women of continuing the practice because of tradition, due to of its status as a perceived religious obligation. 41 Egypt criminalized FGM/C in 2008 and re- vised the law in 2016, raising it from a misdemeanour with a maximum sentence of three years in prison to a felony with a penalty of 5 to 15 years in prison. Judges, doctors and officials are receiving training on how to identify, investigate and report the crime, although implementation remains difficult and inconsistent. | The Penal Code amendment should be ac- companied by broader reforms to give legal force to elements of Egypt's 2015 national strategy to end FGM/C. Egypt should enact legislation to guarantee funding and other resources for a comprehensive response, including prevention programmes aimed at changing societal attitudes that condone the practice. Men's support for the continu- ation of FGM/C, and their involvement in the decision-making process, 42 points to the need for FGM/C campaigns to engage men and boys, who are frequently the decision-makers and practitioners of FGM, more effectively. |
| Conducting successful policy advocacy means not only the adoption of gender-transformative policies to | Conducting successful policy advocacy means not only the adoption of gender-transformative policies to                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           | causes, but also removing the barriers to implementa- tion and holding Governments accountable to their                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          | causes, but also removing the barriers to implementa- tion and holding Governments accountable to their                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

## RECOMMENDATIONS FOR GENDER-TRANSFORMATIVE POLICY CHANGE

Advocacy  efforts  that  are  conducted  to  prevent violence  against  women,  hold  perpetrators  accountable  and  provide  access  to  justice  should be gender-transformative, while building on and being accountable to the women's rights movement. Below are some guiding principles for this work,  which  are  intended  to  serve  as  top-level, regional  guidance  to  be  further  contextualized and adapted for use at the national level.

-  Complement  legislative  reforms  on  women's rights  -  particularly  those  related  to  violence against women - with public discussions and awareness campaigns to help men understand why such change is necessary, to actively seek to  transform  underlying  gendered  expectations  and  power  imbalances,  and  to  see  the broad benefits of such changes. 43  This may include implementing and expanding campaigns inspired by UN Women's HeForShe campaign, UN Women's 'Because I Am a Man' campaign, school  or  community-based  campaigns  and interventions, and by working with the media through longer-term programmes that engage social  media,  mobile  applications,  thematic television series, or posters, together with interpersonal communication activities. 44
-  Advocacy  to  engage  men  as  partners  in  preventing  violence  against  women  should  be conducted  within  a  broader  movement  for equal rights. Engaging men in preventing this violence, holding perpetrators accountable and  providing  justice  for  survivors  is  not  an endpoint,  but  an  essential  part  of  achieving greater gender equality, justice and choice for all.
-  Build  alliances  between  local  women's  rights NGOs  already working to tackle violence against women, and those working with youth, to identify common goals and map out potential unintended consequences. This effort will add strength to advocacy efforts and will ensure  the  goals  of  the  policy  advocacy  are shared, inclusive and accountable to the needs of key stakeholders.
-  Identify,  support,  and  hold  accountable  key male political leaders, both in the public sector  and  in  civil  society,  and  religious  leaders as visible allies working together with female leaders to guide policy change and show personal  leadership  in  setting  a  zero-tolerance standard for violence against women in all of its forms.
-  Complement policies to prevent violence against women with provision of services for those who have experienced violence, including medical care, mental health care, legal aid and economic support, such as micro-finance, vocational training, job placement, or cash or asset transfers, such as land reform, in addition to gender equality training. 45,46
-  Engage men in programmes and platforms that are  informed  and  driven  by  the  Sustainable Development  Goals,  particularly Goal 5 to 'achieve  gender  equality  and  empower  all women and girls,' and contribute towards the holistic implementation of a gender-responsive 2030 Agenda.
-  Recognize  the  diversity  of  men  and  women (including sexual diversity, race, class, religious affiliation,  employment  status,  among  others)  and  address  the  structural  barriers  that have the greatest impact on certain identities. That  includes  those  that  are  associated  with increased risk of experiencing violence against women,  such  as women  with  disabilities, women from ethnic or racial minorities or indigenous groups.
-  While using a rights-based approach, highlight the  economic,  social  and  health-related  costs of  violence  against  women,  and  the  positive impacts of creating societies that are free from this  violence,  including  narrating  stories  and presenting examples of men who have changed and highlighting voices of gender equality.
-  Carry out gender-transformative  awareness trainings  for  the  largely  male  law  enforcement  personnel  -  police,  lawyers,  judges, 47 among  others  -  to  encourage  their  active implementation of laws criminalizing violence against women and their support for bringing more  women  into  these  traditionally  male professions.

## CONCLUSION

Full  gender  equality  will  not  be  achieved  in  the Middle East and North Africa, nor in the world at large,  until  violence  against  women is eradicated. IMAGES MENA provides powerful evidence for action  around  gender-transformative  programming and  evidence-based  advocacy  to  prevent  violence against women. The challenge ahead lies in identifying and supporting those women and men who are active on two fronts: they are leading the way towards peaceful homes and societies, while also changing the underlying social norms that perpetuate  this  violence  through  gender-transformative policies and practices.

## END NOTES

- 1 Read the full IMAGES MENA report here: www.imagesmena.org In Lebanon and Palestine, samples are nationally representative. In Egypt and Morocco, specific regions of the country were selected; the samples are broadly representative of those regions.
- 2 Violence against women was defined by the United Nations as, 'any act of gender-based violence that results in or is likely to result in physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty whether occurring in public or private life.'
- 3 The Middle East and North Africa is a diverse region. The UN Women Regional Office for the Arab States, for example, covers 17 countries in the region. While this brief alludes to the state of violence against women more broadly in the region, many data and examples focus on Egypt, Morocco, Lebanon, and Palestine.
- 4 IMAGES MENA Morocco sample is not nationally representative.
- 5 In accordance with World Health Organization ethical and safety recommendations for research on intimate partner violence, the IMAGES Lebanon research team took specific steps after finding that respondents' reported rates of violence were lower than the evidence and expert observation suggested should be the case. IMAGES Lebanon

research teams fielded a second, wholly new nationwide study, which more squarely focused on intimate partner violence and married life. Where the initial IMAGES sample produced somewhat fewer ever-married participants than expected (thus limiting the number who could speak to experiences of intimate partner violence), the second study sampled only ever-married men and women. The length of the questionnaire was significantly reduced to avoid causing fatigue among respondents; a team of experienced data collectors was given extra training on the nature and dynamics of intimate partner violence, as well as best practices for ensuring comfortable, ethical, and accurate data collection. Initial data from this second sample show much higher rates of women's reported experiences of intimate partner violence and slightly higher rates of men's reported perpetration. This finding suggests that the additional steps taken in the second study may have reduced some women's reluctance to disclose violence.

- 6 UN Women (2017). Tunisia passes historic law to end violence against women and girls. Available from http:// www.unwomen.org/en/ news/stories/2017/8/ news-tunisia-law-onending-violence-againstwomen
- 7 Ministry of Health and Population

(MoPH), El-Zanaty and Associates and ICF International. (2014). Egypt Demographic and Health Survey  (Cairo and Rockville: MoHP, El-Zanaty and Associates and ICF International).

- 8 El Feki, S., Heilman, B. and Barker, G. (2017). Understanding Masculinities: Results from the International Men and Gender Equality Survey (IMAGES) - Middle East and North Africa (Cairo and Washington, D.C.: UN Women and Promundo-US).
- 9 ibid
- 10 United Nations. (2015). A Framework To Underpin Action To Prevent Violence Against Women
- 11 United Nations, Beijing Declaration and Platform of Action, adopted at the Fourth World Conference on Women, 27 October 1995.
- 12 See the IMAGES MENA policy and program brief on gender socialization for more information on the effects of violence in childhood.
- 13 Know Violence in Childhood. (2017). Ending Violence in Childhood. Global Report (New Delhi)
- 14 Fleming, P. and others (2013). Engaging Men and Boys in Advancing Women's Agency: Where We Stand and New Directions. Women's Voice, Agency and Participation. Research series no. 1  (Washington, D.C.: World Bank).
- 15 According to the World Health Organization, 'The ecological

framework is based on evidence that no single factor can explain why some people or groups are at higher risk of interpersonal violence, while others are more protected from it. This framework views interpersonal violence as the outcome of interaction among many factors at four levels-the individual, the relationship, the community, and the societal.' See more here: http:/ /www.who. int/violenceprevention/ approach/ecology/en/

- 16 UN Women. (2015). Framework to Underpin Action to Prevent Violence Against Women (New York: UN Women).
- 17 A number of Arab states maintain reservations to several CEDAW provisions, among them Article 2 (on discrimination against women); Article 9 (nationality rights); Article 15 (equality in law); and Article 16 (equality in marriage and family relations).
- 18 Heise, L. (2017). What works to prevent partner violence? An evidence overview  (London: Strive Research Consortium London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine).
- 19 Mohamed, R. (2017). Working with the government and private sector to promote gender equity and prevent gender-based violence (GBV) in Egypt  (Cairo: Sexual Violence Research Initiative).
- 20 Ibid.
- 21 The Sexual Violence Research Initiative and London School of

Hygiene and Tropical Medicine have been spearheading such efforts internationally, a point cited elsewhere in this report.

- 22 Klugman, J. and others (2014). Voice and Agency: Empowering Women and Girls for Shared Prosperity (Washington, D.C.: World Bank).
- 23 UNICEF defines advocacy as, '… the deliberate process, based on demonstrated evidence, to directly and indirectly influence decision-makers, stakeholders and relevant audiences to support and implement actions that contribute to the fulfilment of children's and women's rights.' In UNICEF (2010). Advocacy Toolkit. New York. Retrieved from: https://www.unicef. org/evaluation/files/ Advocacy\_Toolkit.pdf
- 24 Banyan Global, International Cent for Research on Women and the Centre for Arab Women Training and Research. (2016). GenderBased Violence in the MENA Region: Context Analysis (Washington, D.C.: Banyan Global, ICRW CAWTAR).
- 25 These include CEDAW, the Beijing Platform for Action, the International Conference on Population and Development (ICPD), among others.
- 26 United Nations Treaty Collection. (n.d.). Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (New York: United Nations Treaty Collection). Available from https://

treaties.un.org/Pages/ ViewDetailsaspx?src=T REATY&amp;mtdsg\_no=IV8&amp;chapter=4&amp;lang=en

- 27 Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and the Centre for Arab Women for Training and Research (CAWTAR). (2014). Women in Public Life: Gender, Law and Policy in the Middle East and North Africa (Tunis: OECD and CAWTAR).
- 28 The SDG strategy is informed and guided by international standards and mechanisms, including CEDAW, which all Arab countries, except Somalia and Sudan, have ratified, although the majority have reservations to some of its main provisions; the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action; the ICPD Programme of Action; relevant UN Security Council resolutions; the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) agreed conclusions, etc.
- 29 United Nations Sustainable Development Goals UN SDG). (n.d.). The Sustainable Development Agenda  (World: UN SDG). Avilable from http://www.un.org/ sustainabledevelopment/ development-agenda/
- 30 The High-Level Political Forum carries out regular voluntary reviews of the 2030 Agenda.
- 31 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  and the World Bank. (2016). Women, Business and the Law 2016: Getting to Equal (Washington, D.C.).
- 32 Ibid.
- 33 Ibid.
- 34 Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Malta, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, the West Bank and Gaza and Yemen.
- 35 Ibid.
- 36 Ibid.
- 37 Ibid.
- 38 Ibid.
- 39 Ibid.
- 40 United Nations Children's Fund, Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting: A statistical overview and exploration of the dynamics of change (UNICEF, New York, 2013).
- 41 Understanding Masculinities.
- 42 In Egypt, IMAGES MENA found that more than 80 per cent of women and 90 per cent of men agreed that men are involved in deciding whether a daughter is circumcised.
- 43 Ibid.
- 44 United Nations. (2015). A Framework To Underpin Action To Prevent Violence Against Women.
- 45 Ibid.
- 46 For further details see J. Klugman, L. Hanmer, S.  Twigg,  T. Hasan, J. McCleary-Sills and J. Santamaria, Voice and Agency: Empowering Women and Girls for Shared Prosperity (Washington, DC: World Bank Group, 2014).
- 47 In Palestine, for example, UN Women and its partners worked with judges to discuss methods, challenges and opportunities for the

specialization of services, restorative justice and reintegration for survivors of violence as a way to improve women's access to justice and deter violence against women in society.

UN WOMEN IS THE UN ORGANIZATION DEDICATED TO GENDER EQUALITY AND THE EMPOWERMENT OF WOMEN. A GLOBAL CHAMPION FOR WOMEN AND GIRLS, UN WOMEN WAS ESTABLISHED TO ACCELERATE PROGRESS ON MEETING THEIR NEEDS WORLDWIDE.

UN Women supports UN Member States as they set global standards for achieving gender equality, and works with governments and civil society to design laws, policies, programmes and services needed to implement these standards. It stands behind women's equal participation in all aspects of life, focusing on five priority areas: increasing women's leadership and participation; ending violence against women; engaging women in all aspects of peace and security processes; enhancing women's economic empowerment; and making gender equality central to national development planning and budgeting. UN Women also coordinates and promotes the UN system's work in advancing gender equality.

<!-- image -->

Villa 37, Street 85, Sarayat Al Maadi, Cairo, Egypt.

http://arabstates.unwomen.org www.facebook.com/unwomenarabic www.twitter.com/unwomenarabic www.youtube.com/unwomenarabic www.flickr.com/unwomenarabic

20

apro ches to end violenc ag ins t  women eng ai men in gendr-tasfom

ive